---
layout: post
title: "Monix: Version 2.0.4 Released for Bug Fixing"
author: alexelcu
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
description: Fixes an issue with AsyncScheduler
---

This release is binary compatible with 2.0.x, being a bug fix release
for [Issue #244](https://github.com/monix/monix/issues/244):
*`AsyncScheduler.scheduleAtFixedRate` and `scheduleWithFixedDelay` on the JVM
have incorrect behavior*.

In order to upgrade, just increment the version number in `build.sbt`:

```scala
libraryDependencies += "io.monix" %% "monix" % "2.0.4"
```

<!--more-->

### Details

The `AsyncScheduler.scheduleAtFixedRate` method implementation has
incorrect behavior and this includes `monix.execution.Scheduler.Implicits.global`.
Sample:

```scala
import java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit
monix.execution.Scheduler.Implicits.global

global.scheduleAtFixedRate(1, 2, TimeUnit.SECONDS, runnable)

global.scheduleWithFixedDelay(1, 2, TimeUnit.SECONDS, runnable)
```

What happens is that if the given `runnable` takes more than 2 seconds to
execute, then subsequent runnables are going to be executed concurrently,
without waiting for the current runnable to finish. So if runnables are
slow, you can end up with 2 or even more runnables being executed
at the same time.

This happens because this periodic scheduling is deferred to the global
`Scheduler.DefaultScheduledExecutor` instance, a single threaded Java
`ScheduledExecutor` that then defers the actual execution of the task to the
`ForkJoinPool` in charge of the actual execution. But by doing this deferring,
the time it takes that runnable to execute is not taken into account at all.
This behavior is inconsistent with how these operations work for Java's
`ScheduledExecutor` and with how they are documented in ScalaDoc.

NOTE: this behavior does NOT happen for `ExecutorScheduler`
(e.g. `Scheduler.io`, `Scheduler.fixedPool`, `Scheduler.singleThread`)
or any of the 2 available scheduler implementations for Javascript.
It also doesn't affect `Observable.interval`, `Observable.intervalWithFixedDelay`
and `Observable.intervalAtFixedRate`. These observable builders have had
correct behavior, regardless of the scheduler used.

The fix involves the `AsyncScheduler` implementation to piggy-back on the
implementation in `ReferenceScheduler`, just like the Javascript scheduler
implementations.

Cheers,
